Enhancement Proposal for UpstreamSettingsPolicy (#2489)
nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric: docs/proposals/upstream-settings.md

# Enhancement Proposal-2467: Upstream Settings Policy

- Issue: https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric/issues/2467
- Status: Implementable

## Summary

This Enhancement Proposal introduces the `UpstreamSettingsPolicy` API that allows Application developers to configure the behavior of the connection between NGINX and their upstream applications. This Policy will attach to a Service that is referenced in an HTTPRoute or GRPCRoute.

## Goals

- Define upstream settings.
- Define an API for upstream settings.

## Non-Goals

> - Provide implementation details for implementing the upstream settings policy.

Reviewer: Let's mention that we aren't going to tackle upstream settings for TLSRoutes or other layer 4 routes

Below is the Golang API for the `UpstreamSettingsPolicy` API:

### Go

```go
package v1alpha1

import (
    metav1 "k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1"
    gatewayv1alpha2 "sigs.k8s.io/gateway-api/apis/v1alpha2"
)

type UpstreamSettingsPolicy struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    // Spec defines the desired state of the UpstreamSettingsPolicy.
    Spec UpstreamSettingsPolicySpec `json:"spec"`

    // Status defines the state of the UpstreamSettingsPolicy.
    Status gatewayv1alpha2.PolicyStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

type UpstreamSettingsSpec struct {
    // TargetRefs identifies API object(s) to apply the policy to.
    // Objects must be in the same namespace as the policy.
    // Support: Service
    TargetRefs []gatewayv1alpha2.LocalPolicyTargetReference `json:"targetRefs"`

    // ZoneSize is the size of the shared memory zone used by the upstream. This memory zone is used to share
    // the upstream configuration between nginx worker processes. The more servers that an upstream has,

>     // the larger memory zone is required.

Reviewer: Let's add links to the corresponding nginx directives

Author: We've done that in the actual implementation, but our other enhancement proposals don't have links.

Though I can change that going forward if we prefer it.

Reviewer: Gotcha. I vote to add them here to make it easier to port the API to go code.

    // connections are closed.
    // +optional
    Connections *int32 `json"connections,omitempty"`

    // Requests sets the maximum number of requests that can be served through one keep-alive connection.
    // After the maximum number of requests are made, the connection is closed.
    // +optional
    Requests *int32 `json:"requests,omitempty"`

    // Time defines the maximum time during which requests can be processed through one keep-alive connection.
    // After this time is reached, the connection is closed following the subsequent request processing.
    // +optional
    Time *Duration `json:"time,omitempty"`

    // Timeout defines the keep-alive timeout for upstreams.
    // +optional
    Timeout *Duration `json:"timeout,omitempty"`
}

// Duration is a string value representing a duration in time.
// The format is a subset of the syntax parsed by Golang time.ParseDuration.
// Examples: 1h, 12m, 30s, 150ms.
type Duration string

// Size is a string value representing a size. Size can be specified in bytes, kilobytes (suffix k),
// or megabytes (suffix m).
// Examples: 1024, 8k, 1m.
type Size string
```

> Since this Policy only applies to `http` upstreams, there's no way to set the zone size for `stream` upstreams. For now, we can introduce a global `zoneSize` variable in the `NginxProxy` resource that will set the zone size for all upstreams. Then this Policy would override that global setting on upstreams that it attaches to.

Reviewer: Can we make this its own section so we can easily find/link to it in the future?

### Status

#### CRD Label

According to the [Direct Policy Attachment GEP](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-2648/), the `UpstreamSettingsPolicy` CRD must have the `gateway.networking.k8s.io/policy: direct` label to specify that it is a direct policy.
This label will help with discoverability and will be used by the planned Gateway API Policy [kubectl plugin](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-713/#kubectl-plugin-or-command-line-tool).

#### Conditions

#### Conditions/Policy Ancestor Status

According to the [Direct Policy Attachment GEP](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-2648/), the `UpstreamSettingsPolicy` CRD must include a `status` stanza with a slice of Conditions.

The `Accepted` Condition must be populated on the `UpstreamSettingsPolicy` CRD using the reasons defined in the [PolicyCondition API](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/blob/main/apis/v1alpha2/policy_types.go). If these reasons are not sufficient, we can add implementation-specific reasons.

> The Condition stanza may need to be namespaced using the `controllerName` if more than one controller could reconcile the Policy.

Reviewer: Do you think we should make this statement stronger? It's possible to run multiple NGF deployments that both process this policy.

In the [Direct Policy Attachment GEP](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-2648/), the `PolicyAncestorStatus` applies to Direct Policies.
[`PolicyAncestorStatus`](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/blob/f1758d1bc233d78a3e1e6cfba34336526655d03d/apis/v1alpha2/policy_types.go#L156) contains a list of ancestor resources that are associated with the policy, and the status of the policy for each ancestor.
This status provides a view of the resources the policy is affecting. It is beneficial for policies implemented by multiple controllers (e.g., BackendTLSPolicy) or that attach to resources with different capabilities.

#### Setting Status on Objects Affected by a Policy

The [Direct Policy Attachment GEP](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-2648/) mentions adding a Condition or label to all objects affected by a Policy.

This solution gives the object owners some knowledge that their object is affected by a policy but minimizes status updates by limiting them to when the affected object starts or stops being affected by a policy.

> The first step is adding the `gateway.networking.k8s.io/PolicyAffected: true` label to the affected Service. We also must set this Condition on all Routes that reference a Service affected by an `UpstreamSettingsPolicy`.

Reviewer: Do we also need to specify the type of policy like we do in the condition? Should it be `gateway.nginx.org/UpstreamSettingsPolicyAffected: true`?

Author: ```
object SHOULD instead have a label of gateway.networking.k8s.io/PolicyAffected: true (or with an implementation-specific domain prefix) added instead.
```
So yes, I guess we could set our own prefix instead.

### Status

#### CRD Label

According to the [Direct Policy Attachment GEP](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-2648/), the `UpstreamSettingsPolicy` CRD must have the `gateway.networking.k8s.io/policy: direct` label to specify that it is a direct policy.
This label will help with discoverability and will be used by the planned Gateway API Policy [kubectl plugin](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-713/#kubectl-plugin-or-command-line-tool).

#### Conditions

#### Conditions/Policy Ancestor Status

According to the [Direct Policy Attachment GEP](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-2648/), the `UpstreamSettingsPolicy` CRD must include a `status` stanza with a slice of Conditions.

The `Accepted` Condition must be populated on the `UpstreamSettingsPolicy` CRD using the reasons defined in the [PolicyCondition API](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/blob/main/apis/v1alpha2/policy_types.go). If these reasons are not sufficient, we can add implementation-specific reasons.

> 

Reviewer: I think it might be good to define the behavior when this policy targets a Service referenced by a TLSRoute.

  - I may have a large number of Pods for my Service and therefore need a larger memory zone for it.
  - I may want to alter the keepalive settings for my upstream.

## Testing

- Unit tests
- Functional tests that verify the attachment of the CRD to a Service, and that NGINX behaves properly based on the configuration.

## Security Considerations

Validating all fields in the `UpstreamSettingsPolicy` is critical to ensuring that the NGINX config generated by NGINX Gateway Fabric is correct and secure.

All fields in the `UpstreamSettingsPolicy` will be validated with Open API Schema. If the Open API Schema validation rules are not sufficient, we will use [CEL](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/#validation-rules).

RBAC via the Kubernetes API server will ensure that only authorized users can update the CRD.

## Future Work

- Add support for more [upstream-related directives](nginx-extensions.md#upstream-settings).
- Add a `StreamUpstreamSettingsPolicy` that configures upstream settings for stream servers (TLSRoute, TCPRoute).

> 

Reviewer: Can we include a section on alternatives here? Having a record of the options we discussed over slack would be nice. I'm always forgetting things...

In the future, we can extend the Upstream Settings Policy to include more [upstream-related directives](nginx-extensions.md#upstream-settings).

## API, Customer Driven Interfaces, and User Experience

The `UpstreamSettingsPolicy` API is a CRD that is a part of the `gateway.nginx.org` Group. It adheres to the guidelines and requirements of a Direct Policy as outlined in the [Direct Policy Attachment GEP](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-2648/). It will target and be attached to a Service which is referenced in an HTTPRoute or GRPCRoute.

Below is the Golang API for the `UpstreamSettingsPolicy` API:

### Go

```go
package v1alpha1

import (
    metav1 "k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1"
    gatewayv1alpha2 "sigs.k8s.io/gateway-api/apis/v1alpha2"
)

type UpstreamSettingsPolicy struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    // Spec defines the desired state of the UpstreamSettingsPolicy.
    Spec UpstreamSettingsPolicySpec `json:"spec"`

    // Status defines the state of the UpstreamSettingsPolicy.
    Status gatewayv1alpha2.PolicyStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

> type UpstreamSettingsSpec struct {

Reviewer 2: Is this supposed to be `UpstreamSettingsPolicySpec`?

Author: ```suggestion
type UpstreamSettingsPolicySpec struct {
```

    // TargetRefs identifies API object(s) to apply the policy to.
    // Objects must be in the same namespace as the policy.
    // Support: Service
    TargetRefs []gatewayv1alpha2.LocalPolicyTargetReference `json:"targetRefs"`

    // ZoneSize is the size of the shared memory zone used by the upstream. This memory zone is used to share
    // the upstream configuration between nginx worker processes. The more servers that an upstream has,
    // the larger memory zone is required.
    // Default: OSS: 512k, Plus: 1m.
    // Directive: https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_upstream_module.html#zone
    //
    // +optional
    ZoneSize *Size `json:"zoneSize,omitempty"`

    // KeepAlive defines the keep-alive settings.
    //
    // +optional
    KeepAlive *UpstreamKeepAlive `json:"keepAlive,omitempty"`
}

// UpstreamKeepAlive defines the keep-alive settings for upstreams.
type UpstreamKeepAlive struct {

>     // Connections sets the maximum number of idle keepalive connections to upstream servers that are preserved

Reviewer 2: nit:
```suggestion
    // Connections sets the maximum number of idle keep-alive connections to upstream servers that are preserved
```
